# Configuring Add-on Service

In the current EdgeX security serivces, we set up and configure all security related properties and environments
for the existing default serivces like `core-data`, `core-metadata`, `device-virtual`, and so on.

The settings and service environment variables are pre-wired and ready to run in secure mode without any update
or modification to the Docker-compose files.  However, there are some pre-built add-on services like some device services
(e.g.`device-camera`, `device-modbus`), and some of application services (e.g. `app-http-export`, `app-mqtt-export`)
are not pre-wired for by default. Also if you are adding on your custom application service,
there is no pre-wiring for it and thus need some configuration efforts to make them run in secure mode.

EdgeX provides a way for a user to add and configure those add-on services into EdgeX Docker
software stack running in secure mode.  This can be done vai Docker-compose files with a few additional
environment variables and some modification of micro-service's Dockerfile. From `edgex-compose` repository,
the `compose-builder` utility provides some ways to deal with those add-on services like through `add-security.yml`
via `make` targets to generate `docker-compose` file for running them in secure mode. For more details, please refer to
[README documentation of compose-builder](https://github.com/edgexfoundry/edgex-compose/blob/master/compose-builder/README.md).

The above same guidelines can also be applied to custom device and application services, i.e. non-EdgeX built services.

One of the major security features in EdgeX Ireland release is to utilize the service `security-bootstrapper`
to ensure the right starting sequence so that all services have their needed security dependencies
when they start up.

Currently EdgeX uses `Vault` as the default implementation for secret store and Consul as the configuration
and/or registry server if user chooses to do so.  There are some default services pre-configured to have
`Secret Stores` created by default such as EdgeX core/support services, device-virtual, device-rest, and
app-rules-engine services.

For running additional add-on services (e.g. `device-camera`, `app-http-export`) in secure mode,
their `Secret Stores` are not generated by default but they can be generated
through some configuring steps as shown below.

In the following scenario, we assume the EdgeX services are running in Docker environments,
and thus the examples are given in terms of Docker-compose ways.  It should not be much or bigger
difference for `snap` running environment to apply the same steps or concepts if found to do so.

If users want to configure and set up an add-on service, e.g. `device-camera`,
they can achieve this by following the steps that are outlined below:

## Make add-on services security-bootstrapper compatible

To use the Docker entrypoint scripts for gating mechanism from `security-bootstrapper`,
the Dockerfile of `device-camera` should inherit shell scripting capability like `alpine`-based
as the base Docker image and should install `dumb-init`(see details in
[Why you need an init system](https://github.com/Yelp/dumb-init#why-you-need-an-init-system))
via `apk add --update` command.

Dockerfile example using alpine-base image and add `dumb-init`:

```dockerfile
......
FROM alpine:3.12

# dumb-init needed for injected secure bootstrapping entrypoint script when run in secure mode.
RUN apk add --update --no-cache dumb-init
......

```

and then for the service itself should add `/edgex-init/ready_to_run_wait_install.sh`
as the entrypoint script for the service in gating fashion and add related Docker volumes
for `edgex-init` and for `Secret Store` token, which will be outlined in the next section.

A good example of this will be like `app-service-rules`:

```yaml
...
  app-service-rules:
    entrypoint: ["/edgex-init/ready_to_run_wait_install.sh"]
    command: "/app-service-configurable ${DEFAULT_EDGEX_RUN_CMD_PARMS}"
    volumes:
      - edgex-init:/edgex-init:ro,z
      - /tmp/edgex/secrets/app-rules-engine:/tmp/edgex/secrets/app-rules-engine:ro,z
    depends_on:
      - security-bootstrapper
...

```

Note that we also add `command` directive override in the above example because we override
Docker's entrypoint script in the original Dockerfile and Docker ignores the original command
when the entrypoint script is overridden.  In this case, we also override the `command` for
`app-service-rules` service with arguments to execute.

## Configure the service's `Secret Store` to use

!!! edgey "Edgex 3.0"
    For EdgeX 3.0 the **SecretStore** configuration has been removed from each service's configuration files. It has default values which can be overridden with environment variables. See the [SecretStore Overrides](../../microservices/configuration/CommonEnvironmentVariables/#secretstore-overrides) section for more details.

Note that the service key , i.e.`device-onvif-camera`, must be used for the `Path` and in the `TokenFile` path to keep it consistent and easier to maintain. These are now part of the built in default values for the **SecretStore** configuration. Then the add-on service's service key must be added to the EdgeX service `secretstore-setup`'s`ADD_SECRETSTORE_TOKENS` environment variable in the `environment` section of `docker-compose`
as the example shown below:

```yaml
...
  secretstore-setup:
    container_name: edgex-secretstore-setup
    depends_on:
    - security-bootstrapper
    - vault
    environment:
      ADD_SECRETSTORE_TOKENS: 'device-onvif-camera'
...
```

With that, `secretstore-setup` then will generate `Secret Store` token from `Vault` and store it in
the `TokenFile` path specified in the **SecretStore** configuration.

Also note that the value of `ADD_SECRETSTORE_TOKENS` can take more than one service in a form of
comma separated list like "`device-camera`, `device-modbus`" if needed.

## (Optional) Configure known secrets for add-on services

The `ADD_KNOWN_SECRETS` environment variable on `secretstore-setup` allows for known secrets
to be added to an add-on service's `Secret Store`.

For the Ireland release, the only `known` secret is the `Redis DB credentials` identified by
the name `redisdb`. Any add-on service needing access to the `Redis DB` such as
App Service HTTP Export with Store and Forward enabled will need the `Redis DB credentials`
put in its `Secret Store`. Also, since the `Redis DB` service is now used for the MessageBus implementation,
all services that connect to the MessageBus also need the `Redis DB credentials`

Note that the steps needed for connecting add-on services to the `Secure MessageBus` are:

1. Utilizing the `security-bootstrapper` to ensure proper startup sequence
2. Creating the `Secret Store` for the add-on service
3. Adding the `redisdb`'s known secret to the add-on service's `Secret Store`

and if the add-on service is not connecting to the bus or the Redis database, then this step can be skipped.

So given an example for service `device-virtual` to use the `Redis` message bus in secure mode,
we need to tell `secretstore-setup` to add the `redisdb` known secret to `Secret Store` for `device-virtual`.
This can be done through the configuration of adding `redisdb[device-virtual]` into the environment variable
`ADD_KNOWN_SECRETS` in `secretstore-setup` service's environment section, in which `redisdb` is the name of
the `known secret` and `device-virtual` is the service key of the add-on service.

```yaml
...
  secretstore-setup:
    container_name: edgex-secretstore-setup
    depends_on:
    - security-bootstrapper
    - vault
    environment:
      ADD_SECRETSTORE_TOKENS: 'device-onvif-camera, my-service'
      ADD_KNOWN_SECRETS: redisdb[app-rules-engine],redisdb[device-rest],redisdb[device-virtual]
...

```

In the above `docker-compose` section of `secretstore-setup`, we specify the known secret of
`redisdb` to add/copy the Redis database credentials to the `Secret Store` for the `app-rules-engine`,
`device-rest`, and `device-virtual` services.

We can also use the alternative or simpler form of `ADD_KNOWN_SECRETS` environment variable's value like

```yaml
    ADD_KNOWN_SECRETS: redisdb[app-rules-engine; device-rest; device-virtual]
```

in which all add-on services are put together in a comma separated list associated with the
known secret `redisdb`.

## (Optional) Configure the ACL role of configuration/registry to use if the service depends on it

This is a new step coming from `securing Consul` security features as part of EdgeX Ireland release.

If the add-on service uses `Consul` as the configuration and/or registry service, then we also need to
configure the environment variable `ADD_REGISTRY_ACL_ROLES` to tell `security-bootstrapper` to generate
an ACL role for `Consul` to associate with its token.

An example of configuring ACL roles of the registry `Consul` for the add-on services
`device-modbus` and `app-http-export` is shown as follows:

```yaml
...
  consul:
    container_name: edgex-core-consul
    depends_on:
    - security-bootstrapper
    - vault
    entrypoint:
    - /edgex-init/consul_wait_install.sh
    environment:
      ADD_REGISTRY_ACL_ROLES: app-http-export,device-modbus
...

```

The configuration of Edgex service `consul`'s environment variable `ADD_REGISTRY_ACL_ROLES` tells
the `security-bootstrapper` to set up `Consul` ACL role so that the ACL token is generated,
hence the permission is granted for that service with the access to `Consul` in secure mode.

Without this step the add-on service will get status `Forbidden` (HTTP status code = 403) error
when the service is depending on Consul and attempting to access Consul for configuration or
service registry.

## (Optional) Configure the API gateway access route for add-on service

If it is desirable to let user or other application services outside EdgeX's Docker network access
the endpoint of the add-on service, then we can configure and add it via `proxy-setup` service's
`ADD_PROXY_ROUTE` environment variable.  `proxy-setup` adds those services listed in that environment
variable into the API gateway routes so that the endpoint can be accessible via the gateway.

One example of adding API gateway access routes for both `device-camera` and `device-modbus`
is given as follows:

```yaml
...
edgex-proxy:
      ...
    environment:
      ...
      ADD_PROXY_ROUTE: "device-camera.http://edgex-device-onvif-camera:59984, device-modbus.http://edgex-device-modbus:59901"
      ...
...
```

where in the comma separated list, the first part of configured value `device-onvif-camera` is the service key
and the URL format is the service's hostname with its docker network port number `59984`
for `device-camera`.  The same idea applies to `device-modbus` with its values.

With that setup, we can then access the endpoints of `device-camera` from the host like
`https://<HostName>:8443/device-onvif-camera/{device-name}/name` assuming the caller can resolve
`<HostName>` from DNS server.

For more details on the introduction to the API gateway and how it works,
please see [APIGateway documentation page](Ch-APIGateway.md).
