# EdgeX Unit of Measure (UoM)

## Status

**Proposed** (as of 2/9/22)

This ADR began under a different ADR pull request.  The prior ADR recommended a UoM per device resource and just allowed for the association of an arbitrary set of unit of measure references against the resource.  However, it did not include any specific units of measure or validation of those units against the actual profiles (and ultimately the associated readings). See the [metrics collection ADR](https://github.com/edgexfoundry/edgex-docs/pull/268) for details and prior debate.

Implementation: to be determined, but could be as soon as Kamakura (Spring 2022).

## Context
Unit of measurement (UoM) is [defined](https://www.collinsdictionary.com/us/dictionary/english/unit-of-measurement) as "a standard amount of a physical quantity, such as length, mass, energy, etc, specified multiples of which are used to express magnitudes of that physical quantity".  In EdgeX, data collected from sensors are physical quantities which should be associated to some unit of measure to express magnitude of that physical quantity.  For example, if EdgeX collected a temperature reading from a thermostat as `45`, the user of that sensor reading would want to know if the unit of measure for the `45` quantity was expressed in Celsius, Fahrenheit or even the Kelvin scale.

Since the founding of the project, there has been consensus that a unit of measure should be associated to any sensor or metric quantity collected by EdgeX.  Also since the founding of the project, a unit of measure has therefore been specified (directly or indirectly) to each device resource (found in device profiles) and associated values collected as part of readings.

The unit of measure was, however, in all cases just a string reference to some arbitrary unit (which may or may not be in a UoM standard) to be interpreted by the consumer of EdgeX data.  The reporting sensor/device or programmer of the device service could choose what UoM string was associated to the device resources (and readings produced by the device service) as the unit of measure for any piece of data.  Per the temperature example above, the unit of measure could have been "F" or "C", "Celsius" or "Fahrenheit", or any other representation.  In other words, the associated unit of measure for all data in EdgeX was left to agreement and interpretation by the data provider/producer and EdgeX data consumer.

There are various specifications and standards around unit of measure.  Specifically, there are several options to choose from as it relates to the exchange of data in electronic communications - and units of measure associated in that exchange.  As examples, two big competing standards around EDI (electronic data exchange) that both have associated unit of measure codes are:

- [ANSI X12: EDI standard used mostly in the US](https://ediacademy.com/blog/x12-unit-of-measurement-codes/)
- [EDIFACT: UN EDI standard used mostly in Europe and Asia](https://unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/cefact/recommendations/rec20/rec20_rev3_Annex2e.pdf)

The [Unified Code for Units of Measure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unified_Code_for_Units_of_Measure) provides an alternative list (not a standard) that is used by various organizations like OSGI and the Eclipse Foundation.

While standards exist, use by various open source projects (especially IoT/edge projects) is inconsistent and haphazard.   Groups like oneM2M seem to define their own selection of units in specifications per vertical (home for example) while Kura doesn't even appear to use the UoM JSR (a Java related unit of measure specification for Java applications like Kura).

## Decision

It would be speculative and inappropriate for EdgeX to select a unit of measure standard which is not widely adopted in the industry or choose a static unit of measure list that is incomplete with regard to possible IoT / edge use case needs.  At this time, there does not appear to be a single and unequivocal standard for units of measure that encompasses all EdgeX related use cases (now and in the future). 

Therefore, EdgeX chooses not to select or adopt a unit of measure specification, standard, or code list to apply across the platform.  Instead, EdgeX adopters will be allowed to optionally specify which unit of measure specification, standard, or unit of measure code list they would like used in their instance(s) of EdgeX.

### Specifying the Units of Measure

Units of measure allowed by the instance of EdgeX will be specified in a configuration file (in TOML format).  This can either be specified directly in the core metadata configuration file (but then hard to change when using a containerized or snap form of the application) or in a separate and external configuration TOML file (making it easier for an adopter to provide units of measure even when the application is containerized or snapped up).  

The units of measure in the configuration file can be attributed, optionally, to a specification, document, or other UoM definition source.  The `source` only helps provide the location of documentation about the origins and details of the units specified for the reader, but it will not be used or checked by EdgeX.  An optional default source can be provided at the top level configuration (as shown in the examples below) so that other sources are only need when there specific units used that are not found in the default source.

The units of measure can be categorized for better organization and to allow for different sources to be specified for different units.  The categories are defined by the TOML section names (the UoM dot labels).

**Sample TOML unit of measure configuration**

``` toml
[Uom]
    source="reference to source for all UoM if not specified below"
    [Uom.temperature]
    source="www.weather.com"
    values="C,F,K"
    [Uom.weights]
    source="www.usa.gov/federal-agencies/weights-and-measures-division"
    values="lbs,ounces,kilos,grams"
```

!!! Note
        In the future, the source may be used by EdgeX to dynamically pull in units of measure rather than explicitly listing them in a configuration file.  As there is no standard for this type of data exchange today, this goes beyond the complexity of EdgeX needs, and would be left to the adopter to implement this at their discretion if desired.

#### External UoM definition

When the units of measure are specified in a separate (i.e. external definition) file, the location of the UoM file will be specified in core metadata's configuration (currently in `res/configuration.toml`) - see example A below.  

**Example A Metadata Configuration - external definition of UoM**
``` toml
[Writable]
    [Writable.UoM]
    validation=off  ## off by default

## in the non-writable area - example external file specified to units of measure
[UoM]
    UoMFile="/tmp/edgex/metadata/uom.toml"
```

The location of the external UoM file should be located in a shared volume or file space in order to allow for the adopter to provide the units of measure independently during configuration/setup of the EdgeX instance without requiring a build of the metadata service or a reconstruction of the Docker image/container.

!!! Info
        In future versions, multiple external UoM definition files might be specified or use of inline and exteral files might be allowed simultaneously.  This may help the organization of the units in the future.  In the first iteration of this functionality, either one external file *or* inline definition is allowed.

#### Inline UoM definition
When the units of measure are specified directly in metadata's configuration file (i.e. inline definition), the actual units of measure are provided in core metadata's configuration (currently in `res/configuration.toml`) - see example B below.  

**Example B Metadata Configuration - inline definition of UoM**
``` toml
[Writable]
    [Writable.UoM]
    validation=false  ## off by default

## in the non-writable area - example inline units of measure
[Uom]
    source="reference to source for all UoM if not specified below"
    [Uom.temperature]
    source="www.weather.com"
    values="C,F,K"
    [Uom.weights]
    source="www.usa.gov/federal-agencies/weights-and-measures-division"
    values="lbs,ounces,kilos,grams"
```

#### Specifying Validation on or off
Additionally, in either external or inline definition, a configuration option for unit of measure validation being `on` or `off` will be provided (note `validation` in both example A and B above).  The units of measure or the location of the UoM file is static, but the ability to turn validation on/off is dynamic and therefore in the writable area of configuration.  For backward compatibility, validation will be off by default.

### Validation of the Units of Measure

Core metadata will read the units of measure from its configuration (either inline or from the specified external file).  Like all configuration information, this data will be stored in the configuration service (Consul today) on initial startup of the core metadata service.

When validation is turned `on` (Writable.UoM.validation is set to true), all device profile `units` (in device resource, device properties) will be validated against the list of units of measure by core metadata.  In other words, when a device profile is created or updated or when a device resource is added or updated via the core metadata API, the units specified in the device resource's `units` field (see resource example below) will be checked against the valid list of UoM provided via core metadata configuration.  If the `units` value matches any one of the configuration units of measure, then the device resource is considered valid - allowing the create or update operation to continue.  

If the `units` value does not match any one of the configuration units of measure, then the device profile or device resource operation (create or update) is rejected (error code 500 is returned) and an appropriate error message is returned in the response to the caller of the core metadata API.

In the example device resource below, core metadata would check that `C` is in the list of units of measure in the configuration.

``` yaml
deviceResources:
-
  name: "RoomTemperature"
  isHidden: false
  description: "Room Temperature x10 °C (Read Only)"
  attributes:
    { primaryTable: "INPUT_REGISTERS", startingAddress: 3, rawType: "Int16" }
  properties:
    valueType: "Float32"
    readWrite: "R"
    scale: "0.1"
    units: "C"    ## core metadata checks this value against its list of valid units of measure
```

By checking the `units` property of the device resources (on creation or updates of the device profile or create/update of the device resources), and rejecting any additions or changes that include non-valid units of measure, then we can be assured that all readings created by the device service will contain valid units by default (assuming that validation of the units of measure is always on).

## Considerations

### Validation important and architecturally significant

Based on discussion in the Core WG meeting of 2/3/22, it was decided that without validation and some valid list of actual UoM, the ADR was just adding metadata to the profile and thus did not even rise to the level of "significant" architectural decision.  It was further felt that in order to really provide any value to adopters and to get adherence to their chosen units of measure, EdgeX had to allow for a valid list of units of measure to be specified and be used to check profile units - but in a way that is easy to configure/provide without having to rebuild a service for example.  If the units of measure were defined just in the standard configuration file, it would make it hard to change this list in deployments. 

This new UoM ADR is the result of that discussion.  In general, it specifies, through adopter provided configuration, the exact unit of measures that are allowed for the EdgeX instance and any optional reference (such as a specification) where those units are defined.  It does so through either core metadata configuration (inline) or via an external file making it easier to change.

### Use of SenML

[SenML](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8428) was suggested as a specification (currently a proposed standard) from which EdgeX may draw some guidance or inspiration with regard to unit of measure representation in "simple sensor measurements and device parameters."

In fact, SenML defines a simple data model (in JSON, CBOR, XML, EXI) for the exchange of what EdgeX would call readings.  A JSON example is below:

``` json
[{"n":"urn:dev:ow:10e2073a01080063","u":"Cel","v":23.1}]
```

In the example above, the array (what EdgeX would consider a collection of readings) has a single SenML Record with a
measurement for a sensor named "urn:dev:ow:10e2073a01080063" with a current value of 23.1 for degrees measured in Celsius (Cel) unit of measure.  However, SenML suggests the use of short names for the keys in most cases, but long names could be used.  In which case, the JSON SenML reading would look like the following:

``` json
[{"Name":"urn:dev:ow:10e2073a01080063","Unit":"Cel","Value":23.1}]
```

In this way, the parallels to EdgeX model are, by accident, uncanny - at least in the JSON instance.  SenML goes to much more depth to provide extensions and more definitions around measurements.  But at its base, the EdgeX format is not unlike SenML and could easily be aligned with SenML in the future (or allow for an application service to export in SenML with an additional function fairly easily and if there were demand).

However, on the basis of "unit of measure", SenML is actually light on details.  This ADR and the proposal here goes much further than what SenML specifies.  With regard to UoM, the SenML specification only says:

!!! Quote
    If the Record has no Unit, the Base Unit is used as the Unit.  Having no Unit and no Base Unit is allowed; any information that may be required about units applicable to the value then needs to be provided by the application context.

Therefore, SenML should be examined for future versions of EdgeX with regard to data model, but its relevance to **unit of measure** is believed to be minimal at this time.

## Consequences
- Validation could impact performance.  Therefore allowing it to be turned on or off is critical to some use cases.  However, it will only impact performance of profile creation/updates (and associated device resources).

## References

### UoM Standards

- https://ediacademy.com/blog/x12-unit-of-measurement-codes/
- https://unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/cefact/recommendations/rec20/rec20_rev3_Annex2e.pdf
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unified_Code_for_Units_of_Measure
- https://www.ogc.org/standards/sensorthings
- https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8428

### UoM Tools and Databases
- https://ucum.nlm.nih.gov/ucum-lhc/demo.html
- https://project-haystack.org/doc/Units
- https://github.com/fantom-lang/fantom/blob/master/etc/sys/units.txt
- https://gs1.github.io/UnitConverterUNECERec20/